The Project Gutenberg eBook of Christmas carols
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Christmas carols
        Old English carols for Christmas and other festivals


Contributor: Lucy Etheldred Broadwood

Editor: L. Edna Walter

Illustrator: J. H. Hartley

Release date: December 23, 2023 [eBook #72492]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The MacMillian Company, 1922

Credits: Robin Monks, Linda Cantoni, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS CAROLS ***




CHRISTMAS CAROLS


_IN THE SAME SERIES._

ENGLISH NURSERY RHYMES.

  Selected and Edited by L. EDNA WALTER. B.Sc.
    Harmonized by LUCY E. BROADWOOD.
      Illustrated by DOROTHY M. WHEELER.

     Containing 32 full-page illustrations in colour, decorative
     borders, and about 60 decorative headings and tail-pieces.
     Demy 4to (11-1/2 × 8-3/4 inches).


  SONGS FROM
  ALICE IN WONDERLAND
  AND
  THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS.

  Words by LEWIS CARROLL.
    Music by LUCY E. BROADWOOD.
      Illustrations by CHARLES FOLKARD.

     Containing 12 full-page illustrations in colour, decorative
     borders, and many small illustrations. Demy 4to, cloth.


Published by A. & C. BLACK, Ltd., 4, 5, & 6, Soho Square, London, W.1.

[Illustration]




CHRISTMAS CAROLS

Old English Carols for Christmas and other Festivals.


  SELECTED AND EDITED BY
  L. EDNA WALTER M.B.E., B.Sc., A.C.G.I.

  HARMONISED BY
  LUCY E. BROADWOOD

  ILLUSTRATED BY
  J.H. HARTLEY

[Illustration]

  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, FIFTH AVENUE.
  LONDON: A. & C. BLACK, LIMITED, 4, 5, & 6, SOHO SQUARE.


  _This book is dedicated to

  ELIZABETH

  because she rather liked it._


Published, Autumn, 1922.




FOREWORD

[Illustration: FOREWORD

GLORIA EXCELSIS DEO]


Special times or events have been celebrated from time immemorial by
feasting, dancing, and singing. Often the dancers formed a ring and
sang as they danced, first the dance and later the song being called
a carol. The carol was not always strictly religious, although in the
old times both the singing and dancing often took place in cathedrals
and churches. Some of the carols that we still know are connected with
times before the Christian era. They have now lost their dance and the
melody has changed, but the ideas are very ancient. The Holly and the
Ivy suggest the old Druids, and we still put up Holly and Ivy in our
houses just as people did before the time of Christ. We put them up at
Christmas, and we sing the carol at Christmas—but the idea at the back
of it is older than Christmas, for the Church accepted all that was
found to be of value in the old customs, and adapted them to set forth
the newer faith. The carrying in of the Boar’s Head is an old ceremony,
too. It was considered a Royal Dish, and Henry II. ordered it to appear
at a special feast which he gave in honour of his son.

In the old days people thought of the New Year as the time when the
trees and flowers began to come out—that is about May Day—so the May
Day Carols celebrate the New Year’s Day of ever so long ago. Gradually,
however, carols have centred more and more round events in the life of
Christ, and especially round the wonderful story of His Birth. Many
of them have just been handed on from one person to another through
hundreds of years, some have only been written down at all during the
last century. For example, the version given here of the “Black Decree”
was sung into my phonograph by an old man of seventy-five. All the
carols chosen for this book are those which have been sung through
many, many years at times of festival and mirth (note how often food
and drink are referred to), so don’t expect them to be pious in the
modern way or to be at all like our present-day hymns.

The Publishers desire to acknowledge their indebtedness to Miss Lucy E.
Broadwood for kindly permitting them to reproduce in this collection
the following carols from her _ENGLISH TRADITIONAL SONGS AND CAROLS_:
“King Pharaoh,” “The Moon Shines Bright,” “The Sussex Mummers’ Carol,”
and “I’ve been Rambling all the Night.” Also to Miss A.G. Gilchrist for
the “Pace Egging Song” and “The Seven Joys of Mary,” and to the Rev. S.
Baring-Gould and his publishers (Messrs. Methuen & Co., Ltd.) for the
“Somersetshire Wassail” from _A GARLAND OF COUNTRY SONG_.




CONTENTS

                                                                    PAGE

  GOOD KING WENCESLAS                                                 12

  AS JOSEPH WAS A-WALKING                                             14

  CHRISTMAS DAY IN THE MORNING                                        15

  GOD REST YOU MERRY, GENTLEMEN                                       16

  THE HOLY WELL                                                       18

  THE FIRST NOWELL                                                    20

  THE CHERRY TREE CAROL                                               23

  DIVES AND LAZARUS                                                   24

  THE HOLLY AND THE IVY                                               25

  A VIRGIN MOST PURE                                                  26

  THE WASSAIL SONG. PART I.                                           28

  THE WASSAIL SONG. PART II.                                          29

  THE BOAR’S HEAD CAROL                                               30

  ALL THAT ARE TO MIRTH INCLINED                                      33

  KING PHARAOH: PART I. THE MIRACLE OF THE COCK                       34

  KING PHARAOH: PART II. THE MIRACULOUS HARVEST                       37

  THE BLACK DECREE                                                    38

  SOMERSETSHIRE WASSAIL                                               40

[Illustration]

  A CHILD THIS DAY IS BORN                                            43

  THE MOON SHINES BRIGHT                                              44

  A CAROL FOR TWELFTH DAY                                             47

  THE LORD AT FIRST DID ADAM MAKE                                     48

  THE SEVEN JOYS OF MARY                                              50

  THE SUSSEX MUMMERS’ CAROL                                           52

  AS I SAT ON A SUNNY BANK                                            53

  PACE-EGGING SONG                                                    54

  I’VE BEEN RAMBLING ALL THE NIGHT                                    57

  GOOD CHRISTIAN MEN, REJOICE                                         58

[Illustration]




ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOUR

BY

J.H. HARTLEY

  PAGE AND MONARCH FORTH THEY WENT                        _Frontispiece_

                                                                    PAGE

  IN FIELDS WHERE THEY LAY KEEPING THEIR SHEEP                        21

  MARY SAID TO CHERRY TREE, “BOW DOWN TO MY KNEE”                     22

  THE BOAR’S HEAD IN HAND BEAR I                                      31

  LET ALL YOUR SONGS AND PRAISES BE UNTO HIS HEAVENLY MAJESTY         32

  “SAY, WHERE DID YOU COME FROM, GOOD MAN?”                           35

  “COME, HUSBANDMAN,” CRIED JESUS, “CAST ALL YOUR SEED AWAY”          36

  O MAID, FAIR MAID, IN HOLLAND SMOCK                                 41

  GLAD TIDINGS TO ALL MEN                                             42

  AWAKE, AWAKE, GOOD PEOPLE ALL!                                      45

  FOR I PERFORCE MUST TAKE MY LEAVE OF ALL MY DAINTY CHEER            46

  OH, HERE COME WE JOLLY BOYS, ALL OF ONE MIND                        55

  A BRANCH OF MAY, MY DEAR, I SAY, BEFORE YOUR DOOR I STAND           56

  NOW TO THE LORD SING PRAISES, ALL YOU WITHIN THIS PLACE _On the Cover_

[Illustration]




Good King Wenceslas

[Illustration]


    1. Good King Wenceslas looked out
      On the Feast of Stephen,
    When the snow lay round about,
      Deep and crisp and even.
    Brightly shone the moon that night,
      Though the frost was cruel,
    When a poor man came in sight,
      Gathering winter fuel.

    2. “Hither, page, and stand by me
      If thou know’st it, telling,
    Yonder peasant, who is he?
      Where and what his dwelling?”
    “Sire, he lives a good league hence
      Underneath the mountain;
    Right against the forest fence,
      By St. Agnes’ fountain.”

    3. “Bring me flesh, and bring me wine,
      Bring me pine-logs hither;
    Thou and I will see him dine,
      When we bear them thither.”
    Page and monarch forth they went,
      Forth they went together
    Through the rude wind’s wild lament
      And the bitter weather.

    4. “Sire! the night is darker now,
      And the wind blows stronger;
    Fails my heart, I know not how,
      I can go no longer.”
    “Mark my footsteps, good my page;
      Tread thou in them boldly;
    Thou shalt find the winter’s rage
      Freeze thy blood less coldly.”

    5. In his master’s steps he trod
      Where the snow lay dinted;
    Heat was in the very sod
      Which the saint had printed.
    Therefore Christian men, be sure,
      Wealth or rank possessing,
    Ye who now will bless the poor
      Shall yourselves find blessing.

[Illustration]

[Music: Good King Wenceslas]

[Illustration]




As Joseph was a-walking

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. As Joseph was a-walking
      He heard an angel sing,
    “This night shall be the birthtime
      Of Christ, the Heavenly King.

    2. “He neither shall be born
      In housen nor in hall.
    Nor in the place of Paradise,
      But in an ox’s stall.

    3. “He neither shall be clothed
      In purple nor in pall,
    But in the fair white linen
      That usen babies all.

    4. “He neither shall be rocked
      In silver nor in gold,
    But in a wooden manger
      That resteth on the mould.”

    5. As Joseph was a-walking,
      There did an angel sing;
    And Mary’s child at midnight
      Was born to be our King.

    6. Then be ye glad, good people,
      This night of all the year,
    And light ye up your candles,
      For His star it shineth clear.

[Illustration]




Christmas Day in the Morning

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. I saw three ships come sailing in,
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    I saw three ships come sailing in,
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    2. And what was in those ships all three
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And what was in those ships all three
    On Christmas Day in the morning?

    3. Our Saviour Christ and His lady
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    Our Saviour Christ and His lady
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    4. Pray whither sailed those ships all three
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    Pray whither sailed those ships all three
    On Christmas Day in the morning?

    5. O they sailed into Bethlehem
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    O they sailed into Bethlehem
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    6. And all the bells on earth shall ring
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And all the bells on earth shall ring
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    7. And all the angels in Heaven shall sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And all the angels in Heaven shall sing
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    8. And all the souls on earth shall sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And all the souls on earth shall sing
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    9. Then let us all rejoice amain
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    Then let us all rejoice amain
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

[Illustration]




God rest you merry, Gentlemen!

[Illustration]


    1. God rest you merry, Gentlemen!
      Let nothing you dismay;
    Remember Christ our Saviour
      Was born upon this day,
    To save us all from Satan’s power
      When we were gone astray.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    2. In Bethlehem in Jury
      This blessèd Babe was born,
    And laid within a manger
      Upon this blessèd morn:
    The which His Mother Mary
      Nothing did take in scorn.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    3. From God, our Heavenly Father,
      A blessèd angel came,
    And unto certain shepherds
      Brought tidings of the same,
    How that in Bethlehem was born
      The Son of God by name.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    4. “Fear not,” then said the angel,
      “Let nothing you affright:
    This day is born a Saviour
      Of virtue, power, and might;
    So frequently to vanquish all
      The friends of Satan quite.”
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    5. The shepherds at those tidings
      Rejoiced much in mind,
    And left their flocks a-feeding
      In tempest, storm, and wind,
    And went to Bethlehem straightway
      This blessèd Babe to find.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    6. But when to Bethlehem they came,
      Where this dear Infant lay,
    They found Him in a manger
      Where oxen feed on hay;
    His mother Mary, kneeling,
      Unto the Lord did pray.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

    7. Now to the Lord sing praises,
      All you within this place,
    And with true love and brotherhood
      Each other now embrace;
    This holy-tide of Christmas
     All others doth efface.
    O tidings of comfort and joy,
    O tidings of comfort and joy.

[Illustration]

[Music: God rest you merry, Gentlemen!]

[Illustration]




The Holy Well

[Illustration]


    1.  As it fell out one May morning,
    On a bright holiday,
    Sweet Jesus ask’d His mother dear,
    If He might go to play.
        “To play, to play, sweet Jesus go.
    And to play now get you gone,
    And let me hear of no complaints,
    At night when you come home.”

    2.  Sweet Jesus went down to yonder town,
    As far as the Holy Well,
    And there did see as fine children
    As any tongue can tell.
        He said, “God bless you ev’ry one,
    May Christ your portion be:
    Little children, shall I play with you?
    And you shall play with Me.”

    3.  But they made answer to Him, “No,”
    They were lords’ and ladies’ sons;
    And He the meanest of them all,
    Was born in an ox’s stall.
        Sweet Jesus turned Him around,
    And He neither laugh’d nor smil’d,
    But the tears came trickling from His eyes
    Like water from the skies.

    4.  Sweet Jesus turned Him about,
    To His mother’s dear home went He,
    And said “I’ve been in yonder town,
    As after you may see.
        I’ve been in yonder town,
    As far as the Holy Well;
    There did I meet as fine children
    As any tongue can tell.

    5.  I bid God bless them ev’ry one,
    And Christ their bodies see;
    Little children, shall I play with you?
    And you shall play with Me.
        But then they answer’d Me ‘No,’
    They were lords’ and ladies’ sons;
    And I the meanest of them all,
    Was born in an ox’s stall.”

    6.  “Though you are but a maiden’s child,
    Born in an ox’s stall,
    Thou art the Christ, the King of Heav’n,
    And the Saviour of them all.
        Sweet Jesus, go down to yonder town,
    As far as the Holy Well,
    And take away those sinful souls,
    And dip them deep in hell.”

    7.  “Nay, nay,” sweet Jesus mildly said,
    “Nay, nay, that must not be;
    For there are too many sinful souls
    Crying out for the help of Me.”
        O then bespoke the angel Gabriel,
    “Upon our good St. Stephen,
    Although you’re but a maiden’s Child,
    You are the King of Heav’n.”

[Illustration]

[Music: The Holy Well]

[Illustration]




The First Nowell

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. The first Nowell the Angel did say
    Was to certain poor shepherds in fields as they lay;
    In fields where they lay keeping their sheep,
    On a cold winter’s night that was so deep.
      CHORUS.
        Nowell, Nowell, Nowell, Nowell!
        Born is the King of Israel!

    2. They looked up and saw a Star
    Shining in the east beyond them far,
    And to the earth it gave great light,
    And so it continued both day and night.
        Nowell, etc.

    3. And by the light of that same Star
    Three wise men came from country far;
    To seek for a king was their intent,
    And to follow the Star wherever it went.
        Nowell, etc.

    4. This Star drew nigh to the north-west
    O’er Bethlehem it took its rest,
    And there it did both stop and stay
    Right o’er the place where Jesus lay.
        Nowell, etc.

    5. Then entered in those wise men three
    Most reverently upon their knee,
    And offered there, in His presence,
    Both gold, and myrrh, and frankincense.
        Nowell, etc.

    6. Then let us all with one accord
    Sing praises to our Heavenly Lord,
    That hath made Heaven and earth of nought,
    And with His blood mankind hath bought.
        Nowell, etc.

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




The Cherry Tree Carol

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. Joseph was an old man,
    An old man was he;
    He married sweet Mary,
    The Queen of Galilee.

    2. As they went a-walking
    In the garden so gay,
    Sweet Mary spied cherries
    Hanging over yon tree.

    3. Mary said to Joseph,
    With her sweet lips so mild,
    “Pluck those cherries, Joseph,
    For to give to my child.”

    4. “O then,” replied Joseph,
    With words so unkind,
    “I will pluck no cherries
    For to give to thy child.”

    5. Mary said to cherry tree
    “Bow down to my knee,
    That I may pluck cherries,
    By one, two, and three.”

    6. The uppermost sprig then
    Bowed down to her knee,
    “Thus you may see, Joseph,
    These cherries are for me.”

    7. “O eat your cherries, Mary,
    O eat your cherries now,
    O eat your cherries, Mary,
    That grow upon the bough.”

[Illustration]




Dives and Lazarus

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. As it fell out upon a day,
      Rich Dives made a feast,
    And he invited all his friends,
      And gentry of the best.

    2. Then Lazarus laid him down and down,
      And down at Dives’s door.
    “Some meat, some drink, brother Dives,
      Bestow upon the poor.”

    3. “Thou’rt none of mine, brother Lazarus,
      That lies begging at my door:
    Nor meat nor drink will I give to thee,
      Nor bestow upon the poor.”

    4. Then Dives sent out his hungry dogs,
      To bite him as he lay;
    They had no power to bite at all,
      But licked his sores away.

    5. As it fell out upon a day,
      Poor Lazarus sickened and died,
    There came two Angels out of Heaven
      His soul therein to guide.

    6. As it fell out upon a day,
      Rich Dives sickened and died,
    There came two serpents out of Hell,
      His soul therein to guide.

    7. Then Dives looked with burning eyes,
      And saw poor Lazarus blest;
    “One drop of water, Lazarus,
      To quench my flaming thirst!

    8. “Oh! had I as many years to abide
      As there are blades of grass.
    Then there would be an end; but now
      Hell’s pains will never pass.”

[Illustration]




The Holly and the Ivy

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. The Holly and the Ivy
      Now both are full well grown;
    Of all the trees that spring in wood
      The Holly bears the crown;
    The Holly bears a blossom
      As white as lily flower,
    And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ,
      To be our sweet Saviour,
    To be our sweet Saviour.

    2. The Holly bears a berry
      As red as any blood;
    And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ
      To do poor sinners good.
    The Holly bears a prickle
      As sharp as any thorn;
    And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ
      On Christmas day in the morn,
    On Christmas day in the morn.

    3. The Holly bears a bark
      As bitter as any gall;
    And Mary bore sweet Jesus Christ
      For to redeem us all.
    The Holly and the Ivy
      Now both are full well grown;
    Of all the trees that spring in wood
      The Holly bears the crown,
    The Holly bears the crown.

[Illustration]




A Virgin Most Pure

[Illustration]


    1.

    A virgin most pure, as the Prophet foretold,
    Should bring forth a Saviour, which now we behold.
    To be our Redeemer from death, hell, and sin,
    Which Adam’s transgression had wrappèd us in.
      Rejoice and be merry, cast sorrow aside,
      Christ Jesus, our Saviour, was born on this tide.

    2.

    In Bethlehem city, in Jury it was
    When Joseph and Mary together did pass
    All for to be taxed with many one more,
    For Cæsar commanded the same should be so.
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

    3.

    But when they had entered the city so far,
    A number of people so mighty was there
    That Joseph and Mary, whose substance was small,
    Could get in the city no lodging at all.
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

    4.

    Then they were constrained in a stable to lie,
    Where oxen and asses they used to tie;
    Their lodging so simple they held it no scorn,
    But against the next morning our Saviour was born.
      Rejoice and be merry, set sorrow aside,
      Christ Jesus, our Saviour, was born on this tide.

    5.

    The King of all Glory to the world being brought,
    Small store of fine linen to wrap Him was bought;
    When Mary had swaddled her young Son so sweet,
    Within an ox-manger she laid Him to sleep.
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

    6.

    Then God sent an angel from Heaven so high
    To certain poor shepherds in fields as they lie,
    And bade them no longer in sorrow to stay
    Because that our Saviour was born on this day.
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

    7.

    Then presently after, the shepherds did spy
    A number of angels appear in the sky,
    Who joyfully talked and sweetly did sing
    “To God be all glory, our Heavenly King.”
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

    8.

    Three certain wise princes, they thought it most meet
    To lay their rich offerings at our Saviour’s feet;
    Then the shepherds consented, and to Bethlehem did go
    And when they came thither, they found it was so.
      Rejoice and be merry, etc.

[Illustration]

[Music: A Virgin Most Pure]

[Illustration]




The Wassail Song

[Illustration]


[Music: PART I.]

    1. Here we come a-wassailing
      Among the leaves so green;
    Here we come a-wand’ring,
      So plainly to be seen.
        CHORUS
          Love and joy come to you,
          And to you your wassail too!
          And God bless you, and send you a happy New Year,
          And God send you a happy New Year!

    2. Our wassail cup is made
      Of the rosemary tree,
    And so is your beer
      Of the best barley.
          Love and joy, etc.

    3. We are not daily beggars
      That beg from door to door,
    But we are neighbours’ children
      Whom you have seen before.
          Love and joy, etc.

    4. Good master and good mistress,
      As you sit by the fire
    Pray think of us poor children
      A-wandering in the mire.
          Love and joy, etc.

[Illustration]




The Wassail Song

[Illustration]


[Music: PART II.]

    5. We have a little purse,
      It is made of rabbit skin,
    We want a little sixpence
      To line it well within.
        CHORUS.
          Love and joy come to you,
          And to you your wassail too!
          And God bless you, and send you a happy New Year,
          And God send you a happy New Year!

    6. Call up the Butler of this house
      Put on his golden ring;
    Let him bring us a glass of beer
      And the better we shall sing.
          Love and joy, etc.

    7. Bring us out a table
      And spread it with a cloth;
    Bring us out a mouldy cheese,
      And some of your Christmas loaf.
          Love and joy, etc.

    8. God bless the Master of this house,
      Likewise the Mistress too;
    And all the little children
      That round the table go.
          Love and joy, etc.

[Illustration]




The Boar’s Head Carol

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1.

    The boar’s head in hand bear I,
    Bedeck’d with bays and rosemary,
    And I pray you, my masters, be merry
    _Quot estis in convivio_.
      CHORUS.
        _Caput apri defero.
        Reddons laudes Domino._

    2.

    The boar’s head as I understand
    Is the bravest dish in all the land;
    When thus bedecked with a gay garland
    Let us _servire cantico_.
        _Caput apri defero
        Reddons laudes Domino._

    3.

    Our steward hath provided this
    In honour of the King of Bliss,
    Which on this day to be served is
    In _regimensi atrio_.
        _Caput apri defero
        Reddons laudes Domino._

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




Let all that are to mirth inclined

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. Let all that are to mirth inclined
      Consider well, and bear in mind
    What our good God for us has done,
      In sending His Belovèd Son.
        CHORUS.
          For, to redeem our souls from thrall,
          Christ is the Saviour of us all.

    2. Let all your songs and praises be
      Unto His Heavenly Majesty;
    And evermore, amongst our mirth,
      Remember Christ our Saviour’s birth.
          For, to redeem our souls from thrall,
          Christ is the Saviour of us all.

    3. If choirs of Angels did rejoice,
      Well may mankind with heart and voice
    Sing praises to the God of Heaven,
      Who unto us His Son has given.
          For, to redeem our souls from thrall,
          Christ is the Saviour of us all.

[Illustration]




King Pharaoh—Part I.

[Illustration]


[Music: THE MIRACLE OF THE COCK

SUSSEX GYPSIES’ CAROL.]

    1. King Pharaoh sat a-musing,
      A-musing all alone;
    There came the blessèd Saviour,
      Though all to him unknown.

    2. “Say, where did you come from, good man?
      Oh, where did you then pass?”
    “It is out of the Land of Egypt,
      Between an ox and ass.”

    3. “Oh, if you come out of Egypt, man,
      One thing I deem thou know’st:
    Is Jesus born of Mary
      And of the Holy Ghost?

    4. “And if the news be true, good man,
      That you are telling me,
    Make this roasted cock to crow three times
      In the dish which here we see.”

    5. Oh, it’s straight away the cock did rise,
      All feathered to the hand;
    Three times the roasted cock did crow
      On the dish where it did stand.

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




King Pharaoh—Part II.

[Illustration]


[Music: THE MIRACULOUS HARVEST]

    1. Oh, Joseph, Mary, and Jesus
      Were travelling for the west;
    When Mary grew a-weary
      She might sit down and rest.

    2. They travelled further and further,
      The weather being so warm,
    Till they came unto a husbandman
      A-sowing of his corn.

    3. “Come, husbandman,” cried Jesus,
       “Cast all your seed away,
    And carry home as ripened corn
      What you have sowed this day.

    4. “To keep your wife and family
      From sorrow, grief, and pain,
    And keep Christ in remembrance
      Till seed-time comes again.”

[Illustration]




The Black Decree

[Illustration]

A SHROPSHIRE VERSION.


    1.

    Let Christians all with one accord rejoice
    And praises sing with heart as well as voice,
    To God on high, for wonders He hath done
    In sending us His well belovèd Son.

    2.

    The night before that happy day of grace
    The Virgin Mother, she had no resting place;
    She and her pious Joseph were so low
    They scarcely knew which way or where to go.

    3.

    For they were forced to wander up and down
    And they could find no lodging in the town;
    But in an ox’s stall where beasts are fed
    His mother made our Lord His lowly bed.

    4.

    Three wise men by a star were thither brought
    And found the blessèd Babe they long had sought.
    The best of spices and rich costly things
    They humbly offered unto the King of kings.

    5.

    Then rather than the Lord of life betray
    They worshipped Him and went another way,
    Which so enraged the wicked Herod then
    (The Jewish king, the very worst of men);

    6.

    He caused young harmless infants to be killed;
    All under two years old, their blood was spilled.
    Dear parents’ tears could not his rage prevent,
    Nor pity move the tyrant to repent.

    7.

    The Black Decree went all the country round,
    To kill and murder children both sick and sound;
    They tore young infants from their mothers’ breast,
    Thinking to murder Christ among the rest.

    8.

    But God above, Who knew what would be done,
    Had sent to Egypt His Belovèd Son:
    Where with His earthly parents He was fed
    Until that cruel tyrant he was dead.

[Illustration]

[Music: The Black Decree]

[Illustration]




Somersetshire Wassail

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. Wassail! wassail! all round the town,
    For the cup is white and the ale is brown,
        For it’s our wassail, and ’tis your wassail,
        And ’tis joy come to our jolly wassail!

    2. The cup is made of the ashen tree,
    And the ale is made of the best barley,
        For it’s our wassail, etc.

    3. O maid, fair maid in holland smock,
    Come ope the door and turn the lock,
        For it’s our wassail, etc.

    4. O master, mistress, that sit by the fire,
    Consider us poor travellers all in the mire,
        For it’s our wassail, etc.

    5. Put out the ale and raw milk cheese,
    And then you shall see how happy we be’s,
        For it’s our wassail, etc.

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




A Child this Day is born

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. A Child this day is born,
      A Child of high renown;
    Most worthy of a sceptre,
      A sceptre and a crown.
        CHORUS.
          Glad tidings to all men,
          Glad tidings sing we may,
          Because the King of kings
          Was born on Christmas Day.

    2. These tidings shepherds heard
      Whilst watching o’er their fold;
    ’Twas by an Angel unto them
      That night revealed and told.
          Glad tidings, etc.

    3. Then was there with the Angel
      A host incontinent
    Of heavenly bright soldiers
      All from the Highest sent.
          Glad tidings, etc.

    4. They praised the Lord our God,
      And our Celestial King;
    “All glory be in Paradise,”
      This heavenly host did sing.
          Glad tidings, etc.

    5. All glory be to God,
      That sitteth still on high,
    With praises and with triumph great,
      And joyful melody.
          Glad tidings, etc.

[Illustration]




The Moon shines bright

[Illustration]


[Music: SURREY AND SUSSEX NEW YEAR CAROL.]

    1. Oh, the moon shines bright, and the stars give a light;
      In a little time it will be day,
    The Lord our God He calls upon us all,
      And He bids us awake and pray.

    2. Awake, awake, good people all!
      Awake, and you shall hear:
    Our blessèd Saviour died upon the Cross,
      For Christ loved us so dear.

    3. So dear, so dear Christ loved us all,
      He for our sins was slain;
    Leave off, O men, your wicked, wicked ways,
      And turn to the Lord again.

    4. Oh, the life of man it is but a span,
      He flourishes like a flower,
    He’s here to-day, and to-morrow he is gone,
      And he’s dead all in an hour.

    5. Oh, teach your children well, good men,
      As long as here you stay,
    For it will be better for your sweet souls,
      When your bodies lie under the clay.

    6. There’s a green turf for our heads, good men
      And another for our feet,
    Where our good deeds and our evil deeds too
      Together all will meet.

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




A Carol for Twelfth Day

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1. Mark well my heavy doleful tale
      For Twelfth Day now is come,
    And now I must no longer stay,
      And say no word but mum.
    For I perforce must take my leave
      Of all my dainty cheer—
    Plum porridge, roast beef, and minc’d pies,
      My strong ale and my beer.

    2. Kind hearted Christmas, now adieu,
      For I with thee must part;
    But oh! to take my leave of thee
      Doth grieve me at the heart.
    Thou wert an ancient housekeeper,
      And mirth with meat didst keep,
    But thou art going out of town
      Which causes me to weep.

    3. Come, butler, fill a brimmer full,
      To cheer my fainting heart,
    That to old Christmas I may drink
      Before he does depart.
    And let each one that’s in the room
      With me likewise condole,
    And now to cheer their spirits sad
      Let each one drink a bowl.

    4. And when the same it hath gone round,
      Then fall unto your cheer;
    For you well know that Christmas time
      It comes but once a year.
    Thanks to my master and my dame
      That do such cheer afford,
    God bless them, that each Christmas they
      May furnish so their board.

[Illustration]




The Lord at first did Adam make

[Illustration]

A CAROL FOR CHRISTMAS EVE.

    1.

    The Lord at first did Adam make
      Out of the dust and clay,
    And in his nostrils breathèd life,
      E’en as the Scriptures say.
    And then in Eden’s Paradise
      He placèd him to dwell,
    That he within it should remain,
      To dress and keep it well.
          Now let good Christians all begin
            A holy life to live,
          And to rejoice and merry be,
            For this is Christmas Eve.

    2.

    And thus within the garden he
      Commanded was to stay;
    And unto him in commandment
      These words the Lord did say,
    “The fruit that in the garden grows
      To thee shall be for meat,
    Except the tree in midst thereof,
      Of which thou shalt not eat.”
          Now let good Christians, etc.

    3.

    “For in that day thou dost it touch,
      Or dost it then come nigh,
    And if that thou dost eat thereof,
      Then thou shalt surely die.”
    But Adam he did take no heed
      To that same holy thing,
    But did transgress God’s holy laws,
      And sore was wrapp’d in sin.
          Now let good Christians all begin
            A holy life to live,
          And to rejoice and merry be,
            For this is Christmas Eve.

    4.

    Now mark the goodness of the Lord,
      Which He to mankind bore;
    His mercy soon He did extend
      Lost man for to restore;
    And then, for to redeem our souls
      From death, and hell, and thrall,
    He said His own dear Son should come
      The Saviour of us all.
          Now let good Christians, etc.

    5.

    And now the tide is nigh at hand
      In which our Saviour came,
    Let us rejoice and merry be
      In keeping of the same.
    Let’s feed the poor and hungry sort,
      And such as do it crave;
    And when we die, in Heaven be sure
      Our reward we shall have.
          Now let good Christians, etc.

[Illustration]

[Music: The Lord at first did Adam make

A CAROL FOR CHRISTMAS EVE.]

[Illustration]




The Seven Joys of Mary

[Illustration]

TINKERS’ CAROL FROM ASHDOWN FOREST.


    1.

    The first good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of one;
    To see the blessèd Jesus
      When He was first her Son.
        When He was first her Son, good Lord,
          And happy may we be;
        Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
          To all eternity.

    2.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of two;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      To make the lame to go.
        To make the lame to go, good Lord, etc.

    3.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of three;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      To make the blind to see.
        To make the blind to see, good Lord, etc.

    4.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of four;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      To read the Bible o’er.
        To read the Bible o’er, good Lord,
          And happy may we be;
        Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
          To all eternity.

    5.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of five;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      To raise the dead to life.
        To raise the dead to life, good Lord, etc.

    6.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of six;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      Upon the Crucifix.
        Upon the Crucifix, good Lord, etc.

    7.

    The next good joy that Mary had,
      It was the joy of seven;
    To see her own Son Jesus
      Ascending into heaven.
        Ascending into heaven, good Lord, etc.

[Illustration]

[Music: The Seven Joys of Mary

TINKERS’ CAROL FROM ASHDOWN FOREST.]

[Illustration]




The Sussex Mummers’ Carol

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1.

    A glorious Angel from Heaven came
      Unto a virtuous maid,
    Strange tidings and great news of joy
      The humble Mary had,
    The humble Mary had.

    2.

    O mortal man, remember well
      When Christ our Lord was born,
    He was crucified betwixt two thieves
     And crownèd with the thorn.

    3.

    O mortal man, remember well
      When Christ died on the rood;
    ’Twas for our sins and wicked ways
      Christ shed His precious blood.

    4.

    O mortal man, remember well
      When Christ was wrapped in clay,
    He was taken to a sepulchre
      Where no man ever lay.

    5.

    God bless the mistress of this house
      With gold chain round her breast;
    Where e’er her body sleeps or wakes,
      Lord send her soul to rest.

    6.

    God bless the master of this house
      With happiness beside;
    Where e’er his body rides or walks,
      Lord Jesus be his guide.

    7.

    God bless your house, your children too,
      Your cattle and your store;
    The Lord increase you day by day,
      And give you more and more.

[Illustration]




As I sat on a Sunny Bank

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1.

    As I sat on a sunny bank,
    A sunny bank, a sunny bank;
    As I sat on a sunny bank,
    On Christmas Day in the morning,

    2.

    I spied three ships come sailing by,
    Come sailing by, come sailing by,
    I spied three ships come sailing by,
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

    3.

    And who should be with these three ships,
    With these three ships, with these three ships,
    And who should be with these three ships,
    But Joseph and his fair lady.

    4.

    Oh, he did whistle and she did sing,
    And all the bells on earth did ring
    For joy, that our Saviour He was born
    On Christmas Day in the morning.

[Illustration]




Pace-Egging[A] Song

[Illustration]


[Music: AN EASTER CAROL, AS SUNG FORMERLY ABOUT MIDDLETON, WESTMORLAND.]

    1.

    Oh, here come we jolly boys, all of one mind,
    We’ve come a-pace-egging, I hope you’ll prove kind.
    I hope you’ll prove kind with your eggs and good cheer;
    We’ll no more come nigh you until the next year.
        Fol de diddle dum,
        Fol de day!
        Fol de diddle di dum day!

    2.

    The first that comes in is Lord Nelson, you see,
    He’s a valiant old laddie in every degree;
    He’s a valiant old lad, and he wears a pigtail,
    And all his delight is in drinking mulled ale.
        Fol de diddle dum, etc.

    3.

    The next that comes in is a jolly Jack Tar,
    He sailed with Lord Nelson a-during last war;
    He’s arrived from the sea old England to view,
    And he’s come the pace-egging with us jolly crew.
        Fol de diddle dum, etc.

    4.

    The next that comes in is a soldier, you see,
    He’s a bunch of blue ribbons right down to his knee,
    He’s a star on his breast like silver does shine,
    I hope you’ll remember it’s pace-egging time.
        Fol de diddle dum, etc.

    5.

    The last that comes in is old Nan with her bags,
    For sake of her money she wears but old rags;
    She’s gold and she’s silver and money in store,
    She’s come along with us in hopes to get more.
        Fol de diddle dum, etc.

    6.

    Ladies and gentlemen that sit by the fire,
    Put your hand in your pocket, that’s all our desire;
    Put your hand in your pocket and pull out your purse,
    And give us a trifle, you’ll not be much worse.
        Fol de diddle dum, etc.

[Footnote A: Pace = Pâques = Easter.]

     _The singers of this and similar “Easter Egg” songs are
     usually dressed up roughly to represent the characters
     referred to in the verses._

[Illustration]


[Illustration]


[Illustration]




I’ve been Rambling all the Night

[Illustration]


[Music: BEDFORDSHIRE MAY DAY CAROL.]

    1.

    I’ve been rambling all the night,
    And the best part of the day,
    And now I am returning back again,
    And have brought you a branch of may.

    2.

    A branch of may, my dear, I say,
    Before your door I stand;
    It’s nothing but a sprout, but it’s well budded out
    By the work of our Lord’s hand.

    3.

    Go down in your dairy, and fetch me a cup,
    A cup of your good cheer,
    And, if I should live to tarry in the town,
    I will call on you next year.

    4.

    The hedges and the fields they are so green,
    As green as any leaf,
    Our Heavenly Father waters them
    With His Heavenly dew so sweet.

    5.

    When I am dead and in my grave,
    And covered with cold clay,
    The nightingale will sit and sing
    And pass the time away.

    6.

    Take a Bible in your hand
    And read a chapter through
    And when the day of Judgment comes,
    The Lord will think of you.

    7.

    I have a bag on my right arm
    Draws up with a silken string,
    Nothing does it want but a silver piece
    To line it well within.

    8.

    And now my song is almost done,
    I can no longer stay,
    God bless you all, both great and small,
    I wish you a joyful May.

[Illustration]




Good Christian Men, rejoice

[Illustration]


[Music]

    1.

    Good Christian men, rejoice
    With heart, and soul, and voice;
    Give ye heed to what we say:
          News! News!
    Jesus Christ is born to-day!
    Ox and ass before Him bow,
    And He is in the manger now.
    Christ is born to-day!
          Christ is born to-day!

    2.

    Good Christian men, rejoice
    With heart and soul and voice;
    Now ye hear of endless bliss:
          Joy! Joy!
    Jesus Christ was born for this!
    He hath ope’d the heavenly door,
    And man is blessèd evermore.
    Christ is born for this!
          Christ is born for this!

    3.

    Good Christian men, rejoice
    With heart and soul and voice;
    Now ye need not fear the grave:
          Peace! Peace!
    Jesus Christ was born to save!
    Calls you one and calls you all,
    To gain His everlasting hall.
    Christ was born to save!
          Christ was born to save!

[Illustration]








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS CAROLS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


